.TH "etcnet-options" "5" "0.9" "Denis Ovsienko <info@etcnet.org>" ""
.SH "NAME"
/etc/net interface options
.SH "DESCRIPTION"

.SH "Common options"
.TP 
.B TYPE
This option defines interface type. It is required, if interface type cannot be
found from interface name and if DISABLED is not set.
.TP 
.B DISABLED
Set to "yes" to ignore the interface. Note that setting DISABLED
to "yes" in ifaces/default/options and having no "DISABLED=no"
in interface\-specific options file will effectively disable ALL
interfaces.
.TP 
.B BOOTPROTO
BOOTPROTO can be any of the following: static, dhcp, ipv4ll.
* "static": use ipv4address/ipv6address
'static' has the same meaning as 'none' in initscripts/net\-scripts sense.
If you don't want to assing any address to an interface, but still keep
it up and running, you can just use 'static' and have no ipv4address file.
* "dhcp": run DHCP client
* "ipv4ll": run IPv4LL client (zcip)
As far as I know, there are no working IPv6 DHCP
implementations. IPv4LL is not required for IPv6 because of
link\-scope addresses.
Additional feature is multi\-method configurations (methods
can be delimited by ' ', ',' or '\-':
* "dhcp\-static": try DHCP, if it fails, configure static address(es)
* "dhcp\-ipv4ll": same, but fallback to IPv4LL
* "dhcp\-ipv4ll\-static": try DHCP, fallback to IPv4LL (very unlikely to fail),
fallback to static
/etc/net will try to configure interface at the first succeeding
method. Note that etcnet will process routes and rules despite of
BOOTPROTO.
.TP 
.B ONBOOT
Defines if the interface will be automatically brought up during
system startup or 'service network start' invocation.
.TP 
.B USE_HOTPLUG
If set to yes, iface will be skipped during boot.
Note that standard hotplug calls /sbin/ifup and /sbin/ifdown.
This should be changed to /etc/net/scripts/ifup\-removable and
/etc/net/scripts/ifdown\-removable respectively, if you wish to use
etcnet from hotplug.
.TP 
.B USE_PCMCIA
Same for pcmcia_cs
.TP 
.B CONFIG_IPV4, CONFIG_IPV6, CONFIG_IPX
These boolean options define, if you want to perform configuration of particular protocol or not.
.TP 
.B CONFIG_QOS
This boolean function enables Linux QoS configuration. This topic is explained in etcnet\-qos manpage.
.TP 
.B CONFIG_DOT1X
This boolean option enables wired 802.1x authentication.
.TP 
.B CONFIG_WIRELESS
This boolean option enables wireless extensions configuration.
.TP 
.B CONFIG_FW
This boolean option enables firewall configuration. This topic is explained in README.firewall file.
.TP 
.B KEEP_DOWN
If set to yes, an interface will not be set UP, but configured. You are unlikely to need this option enabled.
.TP 
.B DONT_FLUSH
IPv4/IPv6. Don't flush existing addresses from interface before assigning new ones. Also don't flush addresses on deconfiguration.
.TP 
.B IFUP_CHILDREN
If set to yes, this variable will cause ifup call for all child (having current
interface in their REQUIRES list) after the current interface is set up.
.TP 
.B IFUP_PARENTS
If set to yes, this variable will cause ifup call for all parent (listed in current
REQUIRES list) before the current interface is set up.
Note: this will not work for ifplugd\-controlled interfaces.
.TP 
.B IFDOWN_CHILDREN
If set to yes, this variable will cause ifdown call for all child (having current
interface in their REQUIRES list) before the current interface is shut down.
.TP 
.B IFDOWN_PARENTS
If set to yes, this variable will cause ifdown call for all parent (listed in current
REQUIRES list) after the current interface is shut down.
Note: this will not work for ifplugd\-controlled interfaces.
.SH "Ethernet options"
.TP 
.B MODULE
Kernel module name (or quoted list of names), which must be loaded before interface
initialisation.
.TP 
.B USE_IFPLUGD
A special configuration method. The interface will be created, but no
configuration will be done until cable is plugged in. When ifplugd
detects cable presence on the interface, it will run ifup\-ifplugd to
finish configuration. Values:
no:   don't use this feature
yes:  manage ifplugd for each such interface
auto: same as 'yes', if ifplugd is available and the card supports
link detection
.TP 
.B PERSISTENT_IFPLUGD
Two operational modes are possible with USE_IFPLUGD=auto: persistent ifplugd
(ifplugd will be run once and then only suspended/resumed when needed) and
temporary ifplugd (ifplugd will be killed at ifdown and started at ifup
each time). Default mode is to keep persistent ifplugd process.
.TP 
.B IFPLUGD_EXTRA_ARGS
/etc/net will construct ifplugd arg list automatically, but you can
add extra args with this option.
.TP 
.B LINKDETECT
LINKDETECT option allows to avoid DHCP/IPv4LL timeout, if ethernet cable is
not plugged in during startup. This feature requires ifplugstatus
and is off by default, because not all network cards report correct link
status. Possible values are: yes/no/auto.
'auto' is a special value. If your network card is known to report right
link status, LINKDETECT feature will take effect.
.TP 
.B LINKDELAY
Some Ethernet interface modules require significant time to negotiate link
parameters upon loading. Once the initial negitiation is complete, they indicate
further link state changes correctly. This option specifies maximum number of
seconds allowed for a
module to report link absence before giving up and deciding, that the link
is really absent. If the module reports link before timeout expires, it will
be seen without spending all the time waiting.
.TP 
.B MACADDR_WAITTIME
Some network card modules create network device first, then perform
some initialization and after some time fill in MAC address data.
Hotplug starts working immediately after the interface is created, so
if you use mac address match rule in iftab, it may happen to broke.
If this variable is set to non\-zero, /etc/net will wait for specified
amount of 0.1 sec times for MAC address to become not 00:00:00:00:00:00.
WARNING: THIS IS EXPERIMENTAL FEATURE !!!
.TP 
.B IWCONFIG
Optional path to iwconfig.
.TP 
.B WPA_SUPPLICANT
Optional path to wpa_supplicant.
.TP 
.B WPA_DRIVER
Optional WPA driver name to pass to wpa_supplicant.
.TP 
.B DHCP_CLIENT
Full path to DHCP client. Currently dhclient and dhcpcd are
recognized and command\-line options list built appropriately.
.TP 
.B DHCP_TIMEOUT
Optional DHCP client timeout in seconds.
.TP 
.B DHCP_ARGS
Optional additional DHCP client arguments.
.TP 
.B DHCP_HOSTNAME
Possible values: 'localhost' (compute a valid hostname and send it to
DHCP server with \-h option); 'AUTO' (Get a hostname from DHCP server
with \-H option); 'NONE' (don't send anything); any other string (send the string as a hostname with
\-h). 'AUTO' value works with dhcpcd client only.
.SH "VLAN options"
.TP 
.B VLAN_REORDER_HDR
This option allows changing the REORDER_HDR flag for each VLAN interface. The flag can be
either 0 or 1 and its meaning is described in vconfig manpage.
.SH "IP tunnels options"
.TP 
.B TUNTYPE
IP tunnel type: 'ipip' (default), 'gre' or 'sit'.
.TP 
.B TUNLOCAL
Local tunnel endpoint.
.TP 
.B TUNREMOTE
Remote tunnel endpoint.
.TP 
.B TUNOPTIONS
Append whatever you want (TTL, GRE keys etc). Don't set 'dev' here.
.TP 
.B HOST
Optional host interface. If set, this name will be used for 'dev' option.
.SH "IPSec tunnels options"
At least one of cipher or digest must be configured.
CIPHERFILE and DIGESTFILE are searched in iface dir.
If CIPHER is defined, CIPHERFILE must be defined too,
same for DIGEST and DIGESTFILE.
.TP 
.B IPSECADM
(Optional) location of ipsecadm.
.TP 
.B TUNLOCAL
Local endpoint.
.TP 
.B TUNREMOTE
Remote endpoint.
.TP 
.B TUNSPI
SPI must be defined for an IPSec tunnel. SPI is a hexadecimal
number, values less than 0x2000 are reserved.
.TP 
.B CIPHER
Cipher name.
.TP 
.B CIPHERFILE
Dipher file name.
.TP 
.B DIGEST
Digest name.
.TP 
.B DIGESTFILE
Digest file name.
.TP 
.B HOST
"ipsecadm \-\-nextdev" argument
.SH "VLAN options"
.TP 
.B VCONFIG
Optional path to vconfig.
.TP 
.B NAMETYPE
Optional VLAN naming type, see vconfig \-\-help for details. This option
is also used when processing vlantab. Possible values: VLAN_PLUS_VID,
VLAN_PLUS_VID_NO_PAD, DEV_PLUS_VID, DEV_PLUS_VID_NO_PAD (default).
.TP 
.B HOST
Required parent iface name.
.TP 
.B VID
Required VLAN ID.
.SH "DVB options"
.TP 
.B DVBTYPE
This is a mandatory option. Currently supported values are:
ss223 for SkyStar\-2 rev. 2.3, ss226 for SkyStar\-2 rev. 2.6,
pentanet for Pent@NET, pentaval for Pent@VALUE
.LP 
SkyStar\-2 options
.TP 
.B PID
.TP 
.B SZAP
.TP 
.B SZAP_ARGS
.TP 
.B DVBNET
.TP 
.B CHANNELS_CONF
For SkyStar cards you can override channels.conf location (default is
channels.conf in the interface's configuration directory.
.LP 
Pent@NET options
.TP 
.B PENTANETT
pentanett location
.TP 
.B PENTANET_CONF
Config file name.
.LP 
Pent@VALUE options
.TP 
.B PENTAVALT
pentavalt location
.TP 
.B PENTAVAL_CONF
config file name
.SH "Bonding options"
.TP 
.B HOST
.TP 
.B BONDMODE
Operation mode (optional). Possible values: 0 for round robin (default),
1 for active\-backup, 2 for xor, 3 for broadcast, 4 for IEEE 802.3ad
Dynamic link aggregation.
.TP 
.B BONDOPTIONS
Additional options. This will have effect per interface. The list from
modinfo bond is:
.br 
miimon:int: Link check interval in milliseconds
.br 
updelay:int: Delay before considering link up, in milliseconds
.br 
downdelay:int: Delay before considering link down, in milliseconds
.br 
use_carrier:int: Use netif_carrier_ok (vs MII ioctls) in miimon; 0 for off, 1 for on (default)
.br 
primary:string: Primary network device to use
.br 
lacp_rate:string: LACPDU tx rate to request from 802.3ad partner (slow/fast)
.br 
arp_interval:int: arp interval in milliseconds
.br 
arp_ip_target:string array (min = 1, max = 16): arp targets in n.n.n.n form
.br 
.SH "Bridge options"
.TP 
.B BRCTL
Optional override of brctl path.
.TP 
.B HOST
This variable must be defined for each bridge interface. This is a
(quoted) space\-separated list of slave ethernet interfaces combining the
bridge. Don't forget to create configurations for the slave interfaces
too.
.SH "PPP options"
.LP 
This section assumes knowledge of pppd(8) manpage.
.TP 
.B PPPTYPE
PPP subtype. Valid types are: dialup, pptp, pppoe.
pptp and pptp types will benefit from correctly set REQIURES and
respectively HOST variables. dialup subtype will add 'modem' to
pppd options list.
.TP 
.B PPTP_SERVER
For "pptp" subtype you must specify hostname or IP address of PPtP server
you connect to. Otherwise leave PPPTYPE=dialup.
.TP 
.B HOST
pppoe client requires target interface name. You must specify it in
the HOST variable, create\-ppp will automatically construct correct
pty option for pppd. This option is mandatory if PPPTYPE=pppoe.
.TP 
.B PPPOE
Optional pppoe path.
.TP 
.B PPPOE_EXTRA_OPTIONS
.TP 
.B PPTP
Optional pptp\-client path.
.TP 
.B PPTP_EXTRA_OPTIONS
.TP 
.B PPPD
pppd location, optional
.TP 
.B PPPOPTIONS
Additional pppd args. Note that interface\-specific options file
will override PPPOPTIONS from options\-ppp, not append. WARNING! NEVER
set "persist maxfail 0" for an interface with ONBOOT=yes, otherwise
your host risks hanging forever.
.TP 
.B CHAT
chat location, optional
.TP 
.B CHATOPTIONS
chat options (timeout, verbose mode etc)
.TP 
.B PPPOPTIONSFILE
.TP 
.B PPPINITCHAT
.TP 
.B PPPCONNECTCHAT
.TP 
.B PPPDISCONNECTCHAT
.TP 
.B RESTORE_DEFAULTROUTE
pppd does not save default route for us. We could save and restore it
with ip\-up/ip\-down, but this option will do the trick for us.
.TP 
.B PPPTIMEOUT
Your PPP link will not hang for more seconds, than specified here.
/etc/net will pass according  lcp\-echo\-interval and lcp\-echo\-failure
options to pppd, if this options is set.

